and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley.
A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this
journey.  Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the
lighthearted gaiety of boyhood.  The very winds whispered in soothing
accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more.  Then again the
kindly influence ceased to act—I found myself fettered again to grief
and indulging in all the misery of reflection.  Then I spurred on my
animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
myself—or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on
the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix.  Exhaustion succeeded
to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured.
For a short space of time I remained at the window watching the pallid
lightnings that played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of
the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath.  The same lulling sounds
acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head
upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed
the giver of oblivion.
Chapter 10
I spent the following day roaming through the valley.  I stood beside
the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that
with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to
barricade the valley.  The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before
me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were
scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
presence-chamber of imperial Nature was broken only by the brawling
waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the
avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the
accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in
their hands.  These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the
greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving.  They elevated me
from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
grief, they subdued and tranquillised it.  In some degree, also, they
diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
last month.  I retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were,
waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I
had contemplated during the day.  They congregated round me; the
unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods,
and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all
gathered round me and bade me be at peace.
Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke?  All of
soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
thought.  The rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
summits of the mountains, so that I even saw not the faces of those
mighty friends.  Still I would penetrate their misty veil and seek them
in their cloudy retreats.  What were rain and storm to me?  My mule was
brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend to the summit of
Montanvert.  I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it.
It had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
effect of solemnising my mind and causing me to forget the passing
cares of life.  I determined to go without a guide, for I was well
acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
solitary grandeur of the scene.
The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
mountain.  It is a scene terrifically desolate.  In a thousand spots
the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie
broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon
other trees.  The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines
of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking
in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw
destruction upon the head of the speaker.  The pines are not tall or
luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
I looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I
received from the objects around me.  Alas!  Why does man boast of
sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
them more necessary beings.  If our impulses were confined to hunger,
thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may
convey to us.
  We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
       We rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
  We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
       Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
  It is the same:  for, be it joy or sorrow,
       The path of its departure still is free.
  Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;
       Nought may endure but mutability!
It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent.  For some
time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice.  A mist covered
both that and the surrounding mountains.  Presently a breeze dissipated
the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier.  The surface is very
uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and
interspersed by rifts that sink deep.  The field of ice is almost a
league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it.  The
opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock.  From the side where I
now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league;
and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty.  I remained in a recess
of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene.  The sea,
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
whose aerial summits hung over its recesses.  Their icy and glittering
peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds.  My heart, which was
before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed,
“Wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow
beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
away from the joys of life.”
As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance,
advancing towards me with superhuman speed.  He bounded over the
crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution; his
stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man.  I was
troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me,
but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains.  I
perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom I had created.  I trembled with rage and
horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in
mortal combat.  He approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish,
combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes.  But I scarcely
observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance,
and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious
detestation and contempt.
“Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do
not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to dust! And,
oh! That I could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore
those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”
“I expected this reception,” said the dæmon.  “All men hate the
wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all
living things!  Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
one of us.  You purpose to kill me.  How dare you sport thus with life?
Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of
mankind.  If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and
you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it
be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.”
“Abhorred monster!  Fiend that thou art!  The tortures of hell are too
mild a vengeance for thy crimes.  Wretched devil!  You reproach me with
your creation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark which I
so negligently bestowed.”
My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.
He easily eluded me and said,
“Be calm!  I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred
on my devoted head.  Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to
increase my misery?  Life, although it may only be an accumulation of
anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it.  Remember, thou hast made
me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
joints more supple.  But I will not be tempted to set myself in
opposition to thee.  I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and
docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part,
the which thou owest me.  Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every
other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
clemency and affection, is most due.  Remember that I am thy creature;
I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou
drivest from joy for no misdeed.  Everywhere I see bliss, from which I
alone am irrevocably excluded.  I was benevolent and good; misery made
me a fiend.  Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous.”
“Begone!  I will not hear you.  There can be no community between you
and me; we are enemies.  Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight,
in which one must fall.”
“How can I move thee?  Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a
favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
compassion?  Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed
with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone?  You, my
creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures,
who owe me nothing?  They spurn and hate me.  The desert mountains and
dreary glaciers are my refuge.  I have wandered here many days; the
caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the
only one which man does not grudge.  These bleak skies I hail, for they
are kinder to me than your fellow beings.  If the multitude of mankind
knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for
my destruction.  Shall I not then hate them who abhor me?  I will keep
no terms with my enemies.  I am miserable, and they shall share my
wretchedness.  Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver
them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that
not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage.  Let your compassion be
moved, and do not disdain me.  Listen to my tale; when you have heard
that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve.
But hear me.  The guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned.  Listen
to me, Frankenstein.  You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with
a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature.  Oh, praise the
eternal justice of man!  Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.”
“Why do you call to my remembrance,” I rejoined, “circumstances of
which I shudder to reflect, that I have been the miserable origin and
author?  Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw
light!  Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
You have made me wretched beyond expression.  You have left me no power
to consider whether I am just to you or not.  Begone!  Relieve me from
the sight of your detested form.”
“Thus I relieve thee, my creator,” he said, and placed his hated hands
before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; “thus I take from
thee a sight which you abhor.  Still thou canst listen to me and grant
me thy compassion.  By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this
from you.  Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
the mountain.  The sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends
to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another
world, you will have heard my story and can decide.  On you it rests,
whether I quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless
life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
your own speedy ruin.”
As he said this he led the way across the ice; I followed.  My heart
was full, and I did not answer him, but as I proceeded, I weighed the
various arguments that he had used and determined at least to listen to
his tale.  I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
resolution.  I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator towards
his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy before I
complained of his wickedness.  These motives urged me to comply with
his demand.  We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
rock.  The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavy
heart and depressed spirits.  But I consented to listen, and seating
myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began
his tale.
Chapter 11
“It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original era of
my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard,
and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before I
learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses.  By
degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I
was obliged to shut my eyes.  Darkness then came over me and troubled
me, but hardly had I felt this when, by opening my eyes, as I now
suppose, the light poured in upon me again.  I walked and, I believe,
descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my
touch or sight; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with
no obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid.  The light
became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying me as I
walked, I sought a place where I could receive shade.  This was the
forest near Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook resting
from my fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger and thirst.  This
roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I
found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground.  I slaked my thirst
at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
“It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it
were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate.  Before I had quitted
your apartment, on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some
clothes, but these were insufficient to secure me from the dews of
night.  I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could
distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat
down and wept.
“Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of
pleasure.  I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the
trees.  [The moon]  I gazed with a kind of wonder.  It moved slowly,
but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries.
I was still cold when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with
which I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground.  No distinct
ideas occupied my mind; all was confused.  I felt light, and hunger,
and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on
all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that I could
distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with
pleasure.
“Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish my sensations from each
other.  I gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with
drink and the trees that shaded me with their foliage.  I was delighted
when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my
ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had
often intercepted the light from my eyes.  I began also to observe,
with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me and to perceive the
boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me.  Sometimes I
tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
Sometimes I wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the
uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into
silence again.
“The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened
form, showed itself, while I still remained in the forest.  My
sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every
day additional ideas.  My eyes became accustomed to the light and to
perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from
the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another.  I found that the
sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
thrush were sweet and enticing.
“One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which had been
left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the
warmth I experienced from it.  In my joy I thrust my hand into the live
embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain.  How strange,
I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects!  I
examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
composed of wood.  I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
and would not burn.  I was pained at this and sat still watching the
operation of the fire.  The wet wood which I had placed near the heat
dried and itself became inflamed.  I reflected on this, and by touching
the various branches, I discovered the cause and busied myself in
collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it and have a
plentiful supply of fire.  When night came on and brought sleep with
it, I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished.  I
covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches
upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank
into sleep.
“It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame.  I
observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the
embers when they were nearly extinguished.  When night came again I
found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that
the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for I found
some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from the trees.  I
tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on
the live embers.  I found that the berries were spoiled by this
operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
“Food, however, became scarce, and I often spent the whole day
searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. When
I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be
more easily satisfied.  In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the
loss of the fire which I had obtained through accident and knew not how
to reproduce it.  I gave several hours to the serious consideration of
this difficulty, but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood
towards the setting sun.  I passed three days in these rambles and at
length discovered the open country.  A great fall of snow had taken
place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet chilled by the cold
damp substance that covered the ground.
“It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain food and
shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which
had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd.  This
was a new sight to me, and I examined the structure with great
curiosity.  Finding the door open, I entered.  An old man sat in it,
near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast.  He turned on
hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the
hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form
hardly appeared capable.  His appearance, different from any I had ever
before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me.  But I was enchanted
by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not
penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite
and divine a retreat as Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell
after their sufferings in the lake of fire.  I greedily devoured the
remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese,
milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not like.  Then, overcome by
fatigue, I lay down among some straw and fell asleep.
“It was noon when I awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which
shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my
travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a
wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until
at sunset I arrived at a village.  How miraculous did this appear!  The
huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by
turns.  The vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that I saw
placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. One
of the best of these I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within
the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until,
grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I
escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel,
quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I had
beheld in the village.  This hovel however, joined a cottage of a neat
and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, I
dared not enter it.  My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
low that I could with difficulty sit upright in it.  No wood, however,
was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an
agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.
“Here, then, I retreated and lay down happy to have found a shelter,
however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more
from the barbarity of man.  As soon as morning dawned I crept from my
kennel, that I might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could
remain in the habitation I had found.  It was situated against the back
of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig
sty and a clear pool of water.  One part was open, and by that I had
crept in; but now I covered every crevice by which I might be perceived
with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move them on
occasion to pass out; all the light I enjoyed came through the sty, and
that was sufficient for me.
“Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I
retired, for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered
too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power.  I
had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf
of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I could drink
more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by
my retreat.  The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept
perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was
tolerably warm.
“Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel until
something should occur which might alter my determination.  It was
indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence,
the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth.  I ate my breakfast with
pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little
water when I heard a step, and looking through a small chink, I beheld
a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel. The
girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have since found
cottagers and farmhouse servants to be.  Yet she was meanly dressed, a
coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
hair was plaited but not adorned:  she looked patient yet sad.  I lost
sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing
the pail, which was now partly filled with milk.  As she walked along,
seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose
countenance expressed a deeper despondence.  Uttering a few sounds with
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the
cottage himself.  She followed, and they disappeared.  Presently I saw
the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field
behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the
house and sometimes in the yard.
“On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the
cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been
filled up with wood. In one of these was a small and almost
imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean
but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an
old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The
young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she
took something out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat
down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play
and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the
nightingale. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had
never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent
countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle
manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet mournful air
which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of
which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then
pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt
at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection
that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were
a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had never before experienced,
either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the
window, unable to bear these emotions.
“Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a
load of wood.  The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of
his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on
the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage,
and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese.  She seemed
pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she
placed in water, and then upon the fire.  She afterwards continued her
work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
employed in digging and pulling up roots.  After he had been employed
thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the
cottage together.
“The old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance
of his companions he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to
eat.  The meal was quickly dispatched.  The young woman was again
occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the
cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent
creatures.  One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming
with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his
figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his
eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency.  The
old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different
from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the
fields.
“Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found that the
cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was
delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the
pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours.  In the evening
the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
which I did not understand; and the old man again took up the
instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in
the morning.  So soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play,
but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the
harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since
found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the
science of words or letters.
“The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time,
extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.”
Chapter 12
“I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep.  I thought of the
occurrences of the day.  What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners
of these people, and I longed to join them, but dared not.  I
remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before from
the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I
might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would
remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the
motives which influenced their actions.
“The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun.  The young woman
arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed
after the first meal.
“This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in
various laborious occupations within.  The old man, whom I soon
perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or
in contemplation.  Nothing could exceed the love and respect which the
younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion.  They
performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with
gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.
“They were not entirely happy.  The young man and his companion often
went apart and appeared to weep.  I saw no cause for their unhappiness,
but I was deeply affected by it.  If such lovely creatures were
miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being,
should be wretched.  Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy?  They
possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands
when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day
looks of affection and kindness.  What did their tears imply?  Did they
really express pain?  I was at first unable to solve these questions,
but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which
were at first enigmatic.
“A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of the causes of
the uneasiness of this amiable family:  it was poverty, and they
suffered that evil in a very distressing degree.  Their nourishment
consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of
one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters
could scarcely procure food to support it.  They often, I believe,
suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two
